EMERGING INFECTIOUS DISEASES
Volume 2, Number 1, January-March 1996

COMMENTARY

(Page 59-61)

Infectious Diseases in Latin America and the Caribbean: Are They Really
Emerging and Increasing?


During 1995, infectious disease epidemics in Latin America and the
Caribbean received wide publicity: dengue throughout the region, Venezuelan
equine encephalitis (VEE) in Venezuela and Colombia, and hemorrhagic fever
in Nicaragua. Increased awareness of these diseases followed extensive
reports in the scientific community about the threat of emerging infections
(1,2). Are infectious diseases increasing in the region or are we simply
seeing the results of better reporting of persistent problems? Analysis
suggests that both factors are at work.

Dengue and Dengue Hemorrhagic Fever

During the 1950s and 1960s, under the leadership of the Pan American Health
Organization (PAHO), most countries in the Americas successfully reduced or
eliminated infestation with Aedes aegypti, the principal vector of dengue
and urban yellow fever. As a result, much of the Americas became free of
dengue. Dengue transmission, however, persisted in many Caribbean islands
and in some countries of northern South America that failed to control the
vector; therefore, several outbreaks occurred during the 1960s and in
subsequent decades (3).

Ae. aegypti eradication programs, however, were not sustained and the
mosquito reinfested all Latin American countries except Chile and Uruguay.
As a consequence, dengue spread throughout the region, causing severe
epidemics or even pandemics during the 1970s and 1980s. Currently, dengue
is endemic in virtually all countries with Ae. aegypti, and epidemics occur
periodically.

Between 1968 and 1980, only 60 suspected or confirmed cases of dengue
hemorrhagic fever (DHF) were reported, all by five countries in and around
the Caribbean. After the 1981 DHF outbreak in Cuba, reports of DHF in the
Americas markedly increased. The Cuban epidemic was the most notable event
in the history of dengue in the Americas: almost 400,000 cases of dengue,
over 10,000 cases of DHF, and 158 deaths were reported. The Cuban
authorities implemented a successful vector control program and the country
is still virtually free of Ae. aegypti. After this outbreak, cases of DHF
continued to occur in the Americas, although at relatively low levels,
until 1989 when another large epidemic with 2,500 cases of DHF occurred in
Venezuela. Since then, Venezuela has reported large numbers of DHF cases
every year, and in 1995 the country reported the largest outbreak of
dengue/DHF in its history: almost 30,000 dengue cases and 5,000 DHF cases.
Since 1968, 25 countries of the Americas have reported more than 35,000
confirmed or suspected DHF cases and approximately 500 deaths.

In 1995, dengue and DHF activity in the region was higher than in any year
except 1981. As of November, countries in the Americas had reported more
than 200,000 dengue cases and 6,000 DHF cases, and approximately 90 deaths.
Brazil has had the largest number of dengue cases, but more than 80% of the
DHF cases occurred in Venezuela. The reinvasion of the Americas by dengue
virus type 3, which had been absent for 16 years, has increased the threat
of large epidemics and consequent risk for DHF (4). This serotype was
isolated in Panama and Nicaragua at the end of 1994, and in 1995 it spread
to other Central American countries (except Belize) and Mexico, causing
severe outbreaks. High levels of infestation with Ae. aegypti are common
from the United States to Argentina, making it likely that dengue epidemics
will increase in frequency and severity.

Cholera

Another disease reemerging in the Americas is epidemic cholera, which had
been absent from this hemisphere for approximately 90 years before it was
introduced into Peru in January 1991 (5). Since then more than 1 million
cases of cholera have been reported in 20 countries in the region. Only
Uruguay and the islands of the Caribbean have been spared. Though the
annual total of reported cases has decreased since 1991, the disease is
persistent and problematic in several Latin American countries.

Venezuelan Equine Encephalitis

An outbreak of human infection with VEE virus associated with a large
number of equine cases and deaths was detected in northwestern Venezuela in
April 1995. The disease spread to the adjacent Colombian state of La
Guajira in September (6). Unusually heavy rains during 1994 and 1995
contributed to the epidemic by increasing breeding sites for the mosquito
vectors Ae. taeniorrhynchus and Psorophora confinnis. Viral strains with
epizootic and epidemic potential appear to have emerged from enzootic
strains maintained in enzootic rodent-mosquito cycles (7). In addition,
failure to immunize wild and domestic equine populations allowed the virus
to amplify and spread. By mid-October 1995, reported human cases totaled
26,500 in Venezuela and 22,300 in Colombia, with 24 deaths in the latter.
Attack rates in severely affected communities were 18% to 57%.

This epidemic of VEE is the largest since that of 1962-1971, when the
disease extended from northern South America through Central America and
Mexico to the United States (8). Intensified vector control (including
application of adulticides and larvicides), equine vaccination, and
restriction of equine movement appear to have at least temporarily
controlled the epidemic.

Leptospirosis

In late October 1995, Nicaragua reported several hundred cases of a
hemorrhagic febrile illness in and near the community of Achuapa,
approximately 110 km northwest of Managua; eight patients died. The
affected communities had experienced unusually heavy rains and flooding
during the 2 weeks before the cases were noted. Although dengue was
occurring elsewhere in Nicaragua at the same time, that diagnosis was
excluded by negative laboratory tests and the absence of Ae. aegypti in the
local area. In addition, some of the patients had frank pulmonary
hemorrhage [not typical of dengue]. By the end of October, the Centers for
Disease Control and Prevention had ruled out dengue, other arboviruses, and
hemorrhagic fever viruses as causes but had identified leptospira by
immunohistochemistry in tissues from four patients with fatal cases. By
mid-November, the Ministry of Health reported that 2,480 persons had been
ill, 750 were hospitalized, and at least 16 died. (Investigation to define
the extent of illness and the responsible serovars was still in progress at
this writing.)

Of the examples discussed here, dengue and DHF are certainly reemerging.
Dengue has been signaling its return for more than 15 years and DHF since
1989; these diseases will likely persist as epidemic problems unless
drastic changes in vector control are achieved. Enzootic VEE has persisted
in northern Venezuela and Colombia since the previous major epidemic of
1962-1971. PAHO had urged the countries to increase vaccination coverage of
equines because of increased viral activity in 1993 and 1994. The
appearance in 1995 of strains similar to these of the 1962-1971 epidemics,
with locally intense transmission, raised the possibility that VEE would
reemerge as a major epidemic disease. Whether vigorous vector control
measures and immunization programs have contained that threat is not yet
known, but we must continue to regard the threat as real. Leptospirosis is
a persistent, often under-recognized, problem to which the international
community has paid relatively little attention. In Nicaragua, public health
interest was sparked by concern that the epidemic of a new disease would
pose a threat to other communities and countries, but attention waned as
that threat diminished. Yellow fever, which is usually present in
relatively low numbers in remote areas of South America, reemerged with
force in Peru during 1995. At least seven departments of that country have
been affected (470 cases and a 40% case-fatality rate by September 1995).

Several factors have contributed to the reemergence of infectious diseases
in the Americas. Investments in public health have been decreasing because
of economic recession and a shrinking public sector or have been diverted
from infectious disease programs to other pressing problems (9). Human
populations throughout the region have grown and become increasingly urban,
with many living in inadequate housing without sanitation or potable water.
At the same time, population and commercial pressures have led to the
invasion of forests, exposing people to exotic agents and enzootic
diseases, including yellow fever, rabies transmitted by vampire bats,
arenaviruses, and others. Human behavior has contributed to epidemic plague
in Peru and the rapid spread of diseases such as cholera. To this list can
be added the effects of deforestation and habitat and climate change.
Unusually heavy rainfall contributed to at least three of the epidemics
considered in this commentary (10).

Infectious diseases (whether new or reemerging) are a real and serious
problem in Latin America and the Caribbean. To combat the threat of these
diseases, PAHO, with the participation of other institutions in the region,
has prepared a regional plan to improve surveillance for emerging disease
and enhance countries' ability to respond effectively by strengthening
laboratory capacity, training, and research and by implementing prevention
and control strategies. Ministers of health from countries throughout the
region discussed and endorsed the plan at a meeting of PAHO's Directing
Council in September 1995. Successful implementation of the plan will
require committed action by public health authorities and collaboration and
cooperation by many institutions and experts throughout the region.

A. David Brandling-Bennett, Francisco Pinheiro
Pan American Health Organization, Washington, D.C., USA

References

  1. Institute of Medicine. Emerging infections: microbial threats to
     health in the United States. Washington, DC: National Academy Press,
     1992.
  2. Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. Addressing emerging
     infectious disease threats: a prevention strategy for the United
     States. Atlanta, GA: Centers for Disease Control and Prevention, 1994.
  3. Pan American Health Organization. Dengue and dengue hemorrhagic fever
     in the Americas: guidelines for prevention and control. Washington,
     DC: Pan American Health Organization, 1995.
  4. Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. Dengue type 3
     infection—Nicaragua and Panama, October-November 1994. MMWR
     1995;44:21-4.
  5. Tauxe RV, Mintz ED, Quick RE. Epidemic cholera in the New World:
     translating epidemiology into new prevention strategies. Emerging
     Infectious Diseases 1995;1:141-6.
  6. Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. Venezuelan equine
     encephalitis—Colombia, 1995. MMWR 1995;44:721-4.
  7. Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. Update: Venezuelan equine
     encephalitis—Colombia, 1995. MMWR 1995;44:775-7.
  8. Walton TE, Grayson MA. Venezuelan equine encephalomyelitis. In: Monath
     TP, ed. The arboviruses: epidemiology and ecology. Boca Raton, FL: CRC
     Press, 1989;203-32.
  9. Pan American Health Organization. Social response to health problems.
     In: Health Conditions in the Americas. Washington, DC: Pan American
     Health Organization, 1994;303-420.
 10. Epstein PR, Pena OC, Racedo JB. Climate and disease in Colombia.
     Lancet 1995:346;1243-4.


(Page 62-63)

Microbial Threats and the Global Society

The public health threat of microbial organisms living in what
can be regarded as one large global society was the subject of a
recent interactive workshop sponsored by Tufts University's
Education for Public Inquiry and International Citizenship 10th
anniversary celebration, held at Tufts University in Medford,
Massachusetts. The participants* discussed microbes as the
harbingers of disease and society as both potential victim and
guardian of health. Microbial threats were identified as new,
reemerging, and not yet known.

The forum examined the many unanswered questions regarding the
origin and causes of infectious disease agents. The failure of
traditional treatments due to antibiotic resistance and the
ineffective control and continued spread of infectious agents
were also discussed. Participants addressed environmental and
behavior factors that foster the "amplification" and "spread" of
disease organisms: bathhouses conducive to the spread of HIV
infection, homelessness and crowded living promoting the spread
of tuberculosis, day-care centers that are ideal environments for
the spread of drug-resistant pneumococcus.

In the context of the workshop at Tufts, analyses of emerging
infectious disease issues generated insights about the political
and social framework within which to address these threats to
health: A minority group may be particularly affected by new or
reemerging disease, as was the case, for example, of AIDS in the
gay population or tuberculosis in the immigrant and homeless
population. These groups become valuable resources for
understanding the factors leading to the emergence or reemergence
of the disease and should be the focus of public health efforts
for curtailing its spread. However, as the history of AIDS
demonstrates, because of political concerns, investigative
efforts are often delayed or inadequate to stop the spread of the
disease.

An emerging or reemerging organism, however, grows unhindered by
the social concerns of its potentially infectable host. To
microorganisms, the world is a single entity without borders.
Microorganisms have more freedom than we do and also more genetic
flexibility. Thus, in the contest between humans and microbes, we
are at a disadvantage. We can neither easily acquire resistance
mechanisms against the organisms, nor rapidly respond to an
infectious disease problem in another country. The recent
difficulties in dealing with a possible plague epidemic in India
are just one example. Moreover, antibiotics which have been a
front-line weapon against diseases are becoming increasingly
ineffective, and new antibiotics to treat and contain
drug-resistant bacterial strains are not available.

Inadequate microbiologic diagnostic capability also the result of
the national and international political climate works to the
advantage of emerging microbes. During the plague outbreak in
India, laboratory facilities that could confirm the diagnosis
were lacking. In the United States, similar inadequacies in
laboratory diagnostic capacity interfere with rapid reporting of
common community-acquired infections and their susceptibility to
antibiotics. If physicians promptly knew what they were treating,
the need for use of an antibiotic as well as the proper kind of
antibiotic would be based on data, not guesswork.

The emergence of antibiotic resistance was not factored into
strategic planning by public health authorities. If it had been,
perhaps conditions could have been in place to handle it, as well
as AIDS, tuberculosis, and other emerging pathogens. Insurance
against devastating happenings in infectious disease has never
been given the attention it deserves. Such insurance would have
been helpful, not just in money, but also in expertise to forfend
and then cope with the calamity, like insurance for earthquake
damage to structure and other unexpected disasters. Should we not
consider insuring our future by putting more money and expertise
into basic research, into systems for surveillance, and into ways
to curtail the spread of a disease once it has emerged?

To meet the demands of increased public health activity and to
implement an "insurance policy" for the future, we need to be
able to communicate the problem to a broad audience that
sometimes has little understanding of the science. To some public
health officials, recognition that an infectious disease problem
exists is sufficient to address the problem. However, to those
not trained in the field who may be making important policy
decisions, the "public safety" aspect of the problem can be
emphasized. Health, like crime and traffic, should become once
again a major society issue.

Requests for increasing support for surveillance, education, and
research must take into account current political and social
priorities and emphasize direct benefits to the U.S. population;
international efforts should involve the collaboration of other
countries.

Nongovernment agencies need to be enlisted in this public health
effort; thus a larger portion of society will be involved in the
fight against the ever-increasing threat of infectious diseases.

Stuart B. Levy
Center for Adaptation Genetics and Drug Resistance, Tufts
University School of Medicine, Boston Massachusetts, USA
*Participants: Stuart B. Levy, Tufts University School of
Medicine, and Ruth L. Berkelman, Centers for Disease Control and
Prevention (co-conveners); Christopher Foreman, The Brookings
Institute; Laurie Garrett, Newsday; Margaret Hamberg, New York
City Department of Health; Joshua Lederberg, Rockefeller
University; Jonathan Mann, Christopher Murray, Harvard School of
Public Health.


(Pages 64-70)

Xenotransplantation: Risks, Clinical Potential, and Future Prospects


The reemergence of xenotransplantation as a therapeutic option for the
hundreds of thousands of people dying each year of heart, kidney, lung, and
liver failure has raised ethical, social, and scientific questions.
End-stage organ failure is one of the most important public health problems
facing Americans today. Heart failure, for example, kills four times as
many people as does HIV infection and three times as many people as does
breast cancer; it is a disease with an increasing incidence, and the cost
of taking care of affected patients is 8 to 35 billion dollars each year.
The single most effective therapy for it is transplantation. Preventive
therapies have had little impact on diseases due to end-stage organ failure
and are unlikely to have an impact at least in the next decade. In the
meantime, demand for organs, which far outstrips the supply, continues to
grow. It has been estimated that approximately 45,000 Americans under age
65 could benefit each year from heart transplantation, yet only 2,000 human
hearts are available annually. Patients are more likely to die waiting for
a human donor heart than in the first 2 years after transplantation.

Although clearly an experimental procedure, xenotransplantation between
closely related species, such as baboons and humans, offers an alternative
to allotransplantation as a source of human organ replacement. Alternatives
to allograft donors, such as baboon or pig xenografts, require serious
investigation if clinical transplantation is ever to meet the current
demand and continue the explosive growth pattern it has established over
the past quarter century.

Biologic cardiac replacement poses the immunologic problems of rejection
and infection associated with transplantation. Increasing clinical
experience worldwide has shown that rejection and infection can be managed
successfully in most patients who receive human cardiac allografts.
Further, the introduction of cyclosporine as the primary immunosuppressive
agent for cardiac transplant recipients has resulted in excellent survival
rates (85% 1-year survival at most centers) and has decreased illness
associated with infection and rejection. Although considerable advances
have been made in the field of cardiac xenotransplantation since its first
clinical application by Hardy in 1964 (1), it remains uncertain whether
xenotransplantation as destination therapy can be successfully applied to
humans. However, heart, kidney, and liver xenografts have been able to
support human life for an extended period. It is this fact that
investigators wish to exploit in clinical bridging studies. By providing
temporary heart, kidney, or liver support as a bridge-to-transplantation,
these biological devices may allow patients to recover end-organ function
and await allograft transplantation in a more stable clinical state, thus
improving their chances of survival. Bridging strategies cannot alleviate
the human organ donor shortage. However, if one views bridging strategies
as a first feasibility test, then cross-species transplantation does offer
the possibility of eventual long-term organ replacement. Success in this
more ambitious goal would help alleviate the human organ donor shortage.

Nonhuman primate organ donors have been favored by those wishing to
minimize the genetic disparity between donors and human recipients.
Chimpanzees, although most compatible with standard selection criteria
(e.g., compatibility of size and blood types), are unavailable as an
acceptable source of clinical xenotransplantation. Another choice is the
baboon, which is not endangered, has an anatomy and physiology similar to
those of humans, and grows to a weight of approximately 70 pounds. Baboon
size would limit the clinical application of xenotransplantation with
baboon organs to pediatric patients and small adults. Small body size, the
infrequency of blood group O (universal donor) animals, and the limited
number of colony-bred animals are distinct disadvantages to the baboon as a
donor.

Extended graft survival is possible, but ABO blood group compatibility is
mandatory before xenotransplantation (2). The distribution of ABO blood
groups found in baboons indicates that approximately one third are group A,
one-third group B, and one-third group AB. Universal donor group O,
however, is exceedingly rare. In Americans of Western European descent, the
relative frequency of blood types is approximately 45% group A, 8% group B,
4% group AB, and 43% group O (2).

Although available in large numbers, wild baboons are not suitable from an
infectious disease perspective. Most experts have suggested that
colony-bred animals represent a more suitable donor pool. However, these
animals number only in the hundreds and are, therefore, only likely to
partially meet the epidemiologic demands of the pediatric population with
end-stage organ failure.

Xenotransplantation between baboons and humans raises the issue of
xenozoonoses (3,4). The organisms of greatest concern are the herpesviruses
and retroviruses, which can be screened for and eliminated from the donor
pool. Others include Toxoplasma gondii, Mycobacterium tuberculosis, and
encephalomyocarditis virus. Less likely to be found in animals raised in
captivity in the United States are the filoviruses (Marburg and Ebola),
monkeypox, and Simian hemorrhagic fever virus. Organisms that are unlikely
to be transmitted with an organ transplant (but should be screened for)
include lymphocytic choriomeningitis virus, gastrointestinal parasites, and
GI bacterial pathogens.

The risk for xenozoonoses is likely to be restricted to the xenogeneic
tissue recipient. Nevertheless, one must consider and anticipate the
potential for xenozoonotic transmission through the human population,
constituting a public health concern. The risk for recognized zoonotic
pathogens can be reduced, if not eliminated, by controlling the donor
animal vendor source and the individual donor animal by employing described
screening tests and strict sterile procedures during organ harvesting and
donor autopsy for tissue and blood. The risk for unrecognized pathogens is
present but ill defined.

Surveillance for the transmission of known or unknown pathogens among
health care workers must be conducted by monitoring for unexpected or
unexplained adverse health events. It is difficult to monitor for the
unknown; therefore, surveillance should include notifying the principal
investigator's office of any unexplained illness in exposed health care
workers, as well as telephone interviews of these personnel every 6 months
by the principal investigator's office.

Concurrent with scientific advances in xenotransplantation have been the
necessary ethical debates concerning the appropriateness of this endeavor
(5). Disputes regarding animal experimentation notwithstanding, the ethical
issues raised by many of these debates are strikingly similar to those put
forth 25 years ago in reference to the (then new) field of human heart
transplantation. Indeed, the timeless nature of these queries itself
attests to their essence, for such ethical concerns are appropriate in the
appraisal of any new therapeutic procedure in medicine.

Can one ever hope to determine if or when the clinical application of
xenotransplantation is justified? The assessment of any experimental
therapy, as Fox and Swazey (6) have suggested, should encourage the
investigator to address three critical questions: 1) in the laboratory,
what defines "success" sufficient to warrant advancement to the clinical
arena? 2) under what clinical conditions should this advancement proceed?
and 3) in the clinical arena, what defines "success" sufficient to warrant
further evaluation (6)? Providing answers to this threefold inquiry
requires a reliance upon defined "success," itself an appraisal of judgment
that can only confidently be made in retrospect.

Because human heart transplantation is now considered by most justifiable
for the treatment of end-stage heart disease, I would first like to review
the history of cardiac allotransplantation in light of its ability to
address the above threefold inquiry. I will also discuss the history of
cardiac xenotransplantation with reference to scientific advances made in
the field throughout the past quarter century. Finally, in light of these
analyses, I hope to illustrate the role of baboon heart xenotransplantation
as an alternative to allotransplantation for permanent cardiac replacement
in the treatment of end-stage heart disease.

After the first human cardiac allograft procedure performed by Barnard in
1967 (7) the field of cardiac transplantation witnessed a surge in both
enthusiasm and attempted trials, which was followed by a marked drop in
procedures throughout the 1970s because of poor survival rates. During the
initial peak, 21 human heart allotransplants were performed in the 6-month
interval between December 1967 and June 1968 (with a cumulative 1-year
survival of 22%), and 105 cardiac allotransplantations were performed in
1968 alone (8-10). However, these early clinical trials were marred by
numerous failures, as 65% of persons undergoing the procedure before June
1970 died within 3 months of transplantation (6).

Few centers continued animal research and human procedures during the
so-called black years of cardiac transplantation. The initial explosion in
clinical trials accordingly elicited numerous responses suggesting that too
much was being attempted too soon.

Some would propose that this was the price of eventual "success," and that
further experimental studies at the time could not have avoided early
losses. And yet, there has been, and may always be, a tacit recognition by
medical innovators that the ultimate experiment must be performed in
humans, for no animal model can truly reflect the human condition.
Proponents of allotransplantation at the time of the first heart
transplantation cited the more than 60-year history of experimental cardiac
transplantation, beginning with Carrel's original work in 1905. Although
most of this work began in the 1930s, subsequent investigations regarding
the experimental transplantation of mammalian hearts showed that cardiac
transplantation was technically feasible and suggested the possibility of
clinically relevant survival rates. During the decade before Barnard's
first clinical application, cardiac allograft survival had been shown to
exceed 250 days (mean 103 days) in adult dogs treated with an
immunosuppressive regimen that included azathioprine and methylprednisone
used intermittently. The mean survival in untreated dogs used as controls
was 7 days (11).

Since that time, with further expansion of knowledge in virtually all areas
of clinical cardiac transplantation, 1-year survival has increased from 67%
in 1976, to approximately 85% reported currently at most hospital centers
(3). Human recipients have survived for as long as 20 years after
transplantation, and the 10-year posttransplant survival rate is now
approximately 45% (12). While these figures depict a clear improvement in
raw survival, cardiac transplantation is still not a cure for end-stage
heart disease. Recipients must take immunosuppressive medication for life
and be monitored for infection, rejection, and graft arteriopathy. However,
these results are impressive considering that the recipient population
today is considerably sicker than earlier allograft candidates. In light of
these findings, few would deny cardiac allotransplantation its present
claim to "success." To further understand the evolution of this
achievement, however, we may now look back upon the early years of cardiac
allotransplantation and try to address the proposed threefold inquiry.

First, for Barnard and co-workers what can we presume as "success"
warranting advancement to the clinical arena? They performed the first
human adult cardiac allotransplantation when the maximum survival in
immunosuppressed adult dogs had been 250 days (average survival 103 days)
(11) and suggested that "against the background of this research . . . the
time arrived when a cardiac transplant could be contemplated with hope of
success" (7). Indeed, in their report of this case, they further described
the scientific basis of their clinical advancement by explaining that "this
achievement did not come as a surprise to the medical world. Steady
progress toward this goal had been made by immunologists, biochemists,
surgeons, and specialists in other branches of medical science all over the
world during the past decades to ensure that this, the ultimate in cardiac
surgery, would be a success" (7). Although we may, in retrospect, consider
them justified in their declaration, in fact, at that time the endeavor was
highly controversial and came as a surprise to much of the medical world.

Second, under what conditions did they proceed with this clinical trial?
Given the "hope of success," Barnard and colleagues selected a patient
"considered to have heart disease of such severity that no method of
therapy short of cardiac transplantation could succeed" (7). The patient, a
54-year-old man, had remained in intractable congestive heart failure
(following multiple myocardial infarctions) despite all medical management
(13).

Finally, in this clinical arena, what defined for Barnard and colleagues
"success" warranting further investigation? A concurrent editorial in the
South African Medical Journal may provide some insight into their thinking:
"The claim `successful' can be used even at this early stage because
to-date it is a feat which makes medical history, no matter how short the
further survival of the patient might be (4). "Success," by such an
analysis, was thus not targeted posttransplant survival time, but rather
any posttransplant survival time (given the ground-breaking nature of the
endeavor). Further editorials regarding the ethics of cardiac
transplantation viewed the procedure as a legitimate experiment but not a
treatment (15), while in 1968, the American College of Cardiology suggested
(with regard to the "success" of allotransplantation) that results varied:
". . . the spectrum of success ranges from short-term restoration of
circulation to complete physical recovery" (16).

Indeed, "success" did vary along a spectrum of results. Barnard and
colleagues' first allotransplant recipient lived for 18 days and ultimately
died of pneumonia. However, their second recipient, 1 month later, survived
more than 19 months before dying of chronic rejection (17). Their third
patient also lived more than 20 months after allotransplantation and
ultimately died of carcinoma of the stomach without signs of acute or
chronic rejection (18). One can only speculate how different the world
reception to allotransplantation would have been had the latter two
patients represented the first and second recipients of cardiac
allotransplants. Would these survival data be considered "success," or
would they still pale in comparison with the theoretical goal of obtaining
a graft that could function normally indefinitely?

Clinical cross-species transplantation dates to the early twentieth
century, with kidney xenografts from rabbit, pig, goat, non-human primate
and lamb donors (19). After these early failures, the scientific literature
was largely devoid of reports of clinical xenotransplantation for nearly 40
years. In 1963, Reemtsma and colleagues described six human recipients of
chimpanzee kidneys, the longest survivor of whom died of causes unrelated
to rejection 9 months after xenotransplantation (20).

The first cardiac xenotransplantation, performed by Hardy in 1964, also
represented the first attempt at cardiac transplantation in humans,
predating Barnard's report by nearly 4 years (1). Since 1964, when Hardy
and colleagues at the University of Mississippi performed the world's first
heart xenotransplant using a chimpanzee as a donor, there have been eight
documented attempts at clinical heart xeno-transplantation. Five of these
donors were non-human primates (2 baboons, 3 chimpanzees) and three were
domesticated farm animals (1 sheep, 2 pigs) (21-25). The longest survivor
was a newborn infant with hypoplastic left heart syndrome. "Baby Fae" was
the recipient of an ABO-blood group mismatched baboon heart that functioned
for 20 days (26). However, by the time the first human neonatal cardiac
xenotransplantation was performed by Bailey in 1984 (the so-called "Baby
Fae" case), there had been only limited experimental experience with
prolonged graft survival in the newborn xenotransplant recipient. Studies
presented by Bailey and co-workers shortly before the Baby Fae case
described a mean survival time of 72 days in newborn lamb-to-goat
xenotransplants, with one survivor living to 165 days (27).

This advancement of xenotransplantation into the clinical forum was met
with resistance in the medical community because of a perception that
research with acceptable survival "success" had not been achieved
experimentally. As Losman in an editorial regarding the Baby Fae experience
stated, "It appears that this baboon-to-infant transplantation did not rest
on such a [scientific] basis [as did Barnard's earlier operation in 1967]
"(28).

During the past 3 years, investigators at the University of Pittsburgh
reported two cases in which they transplanted a baboon liver into a human
recipient, obtaining a 70-day survival in their first reported case, and a
26-day survival in the second (29; J.J. Fung, pers. comm.) The
investigators' overwhelming effort to prevent rejection led them to use a
harsh immunosuppressive regimen that permitted multiple life-threatening
infections. Rejection was not the major clinical obstacle they encountered;
therefore, they recommended a more directed and less arduous
immunosuppressive regimen for future patients.

More alarming have been the attempts to apply xenotransplantation of
distantly related species to the clinical arena. In 1968, both Cooley and
Ross transplanted sheep and pig hearts, respectively, into dying human
recipients (30,31). Both grafts failed upon reperfusion, presumably because
of hyperacute rejection.

More recently, Czaplicki and co-workers in 1992 described a case in which
they attempted the xenotransplantation of a pig heart into a human
recipient with Marfan's syndrome (32). By their report, no evidence of
hyperacute rejection was present at the time of death nearly 24 hours after
xenotransplantation. Their protocol used an unusual immunosuppressive
regimen in which both donor and recipient received, in addition to
conventional immunosuppression, both thymic tissue extracts and fetal calf
sera. This regimen also included the extracorporeal perfusion of two pig
hearts with the recipient's blood in an attempt to remove human anti-pig
antibodies before the orthotopic transplantation of the functional pig
heart (33). As astonishing as this case may be in its extension to the
clinical arena of a technique not yet shown to be effective in the
experimental laboratory, it is not unique. Also in 1992, Makowka and
colleagues transplanted a pig liver into a 26-year-old woman dying of acute
liver failure from autoimmune hepatitis (pers. comm.). Despite the fact
that, at present, it appears unlikely that sufficient "success" has been
achieved in the laboratory regarding xenotransplantation between distantly
related species to warrant advancement to the clinical arena, these
investigators were able to obtain approval from their hospital's ethics
committee and institutional review board to proceed with the clinical
trial. Most experts in the field of xenotransplantation share the opinion
that pig-to-human organ transplantation remains at least 3 to 5 years from
clinical trials.

Considerable advances in the field of cardiac xenotransplantation have
subsequently emerged worldwide since Hardy's first clinical attempt in
1964, with a better understanding of the xenorejection process and a more
sophisticated insight into mechanisms for its control. Extended graft
survival has been achieved in a number of different experimental models,
including a greater than tenfold graft survival in non-human primates
treated with conventional cyclosporine-based immunosuppression (34,35) a
more than thirtyfold increase in survival over controls described by Celli
and colleagues in a rodent model (36), and survival beyond 1 year reported
by Kawauchi and colleagues in a non-human primate model (37). These
findings support the potential for achieving clinically relevant graft
survival in humans.

The question is whether we have reached a stage in laboratory
experimentation to justify further attempts at advancing cardiac
xenotransplantation to the clinical arena. If we view the current status of
experimental accomplishments in xenotransplantation with the same scrutiny
as that of allotransplantation at the time of Barnard's endeavor, we are
left with similar conclusions; first, comparable graft survival time has
been achieved in animal models of xenotransplantation as was evident for
allotransplantation before 1967. Second, with our current understanding of
cardiac allotransplantation has also come a greater awareness of its
limitations. Thus, the conditions for the advancement of
xenotransplantation arguably could be fulfilled by a patient with end-stage
heart disease who is a candidate for allotransplantation, but for whom a
donor cannot be identified in time. Finally, the clinical "success" of
xenotransplantation might also be considered (as was the case for
allotransplantation) any graft survival, and the goal of
xenotransplantation to strive for extended graft survival.

However, political and scientific sensibilities today clearly differ from
those of the 1960s, and so the critical assessment of xenotransplantation
must be more rigorous than our previous discussion. Indeed, the above
comparison was put forth largely to underscore the more humble origins of
the (now) successful therapy (allotransplantation) to which
xenotransplantation is currently compared.

What then defines "success" in the laboratory warranting advancement from
the laboratory to the operating room? Having demonstrated dramatic
prolongation of cardiac xenograft survival through experiments in rodent
and non-human primate models (27,34-37), which model most closely
approximates the human condition (and thus which therapy will be most
successful in avoiding clinical rejection) remains to be established.
Therefore, it is reasonable to suggest both that we have reached a
formidable limitation for precisely predicting the applicability of
experimental laboratory evidence and that answers may only be sought from
experiment in humans. This concept was realized by the American Medical
Association with regard to allotransplantation, in reference to which it
released an official statement acknowledging this notion in 1969 (38).

Concerns most commonly voiced with respect to the clinical application of
xenotransplantation, however, pertain to a larger ethical controversy
regarding human experimentation. Reemtsma, in a related comment concerning
the Baby Fae case, suggested the following: "There is a widespread
misperception that medical treatments and surgical procedures are easily
classified as either experimental or accepted. In fact, all treatments have
an element of experimentation, and new surgical procedures are based on
extrapolations from prior work. . . . When does a surgeon decide to apply a
new operation to a patient? . . . the decision is based on balancing, on
the one hand, the experimental evidence suggesting that the procedure may
succeed, and, on the other, the clinical urgency. . . (39).

Under what conditions will the clinical advancement of xenotransplantation
proceed? For those initial patients in whom clinical xenotransplantation
will first be applied, clinical urgency, in the complete absence of other
suitable alternatives, undoubtedly will represent the motivating factor to
proceed. Who will comprise this initial cohort? As Caplan has pointed out:
"There would appear to exist a pool of terminally ill persons, both
children and adults for whom no therapeutic alternatives exist or are
likely to exist in the near future. . . . It would [thus] appear ethically
defensible to allow research involving xenografting in human subjects to
proceed in those areas where no reasonable alternative to therapy exists
(40). In this context, innumerable reservations have been voiced regarding
the ethics of proposing alternative experimental therapies to such patients
for whom therapy has either failed or is non-existent. However, with regard
to clinical experimentation under these circumstances, one must also recall
(as Shimkin has suggested): "To do nothing, or to prevent others from doing
anything, is itself a type of experiment, for the prevention of
experimentation is tantamount to the assumption of responsibility for an
experiment different from the one proposed" (41).

What is the goal of the clinical application of xenotransplantation? The
need for donor organs irrefutably outweighs the resources available, and
mechanical devices and xenotransplantation have emerged as the two most
promising alternatives to allograft cardiac replacement. Mechanical left
ventricular assist devices (LVADs) have witnessed relative success as
"bridges" in carefully selected patients with heart failure. (A "bridge" is
a temporary method of life support designed to carry a patient indefinitely
until a human heart can be found and transplanted. It is not a
"destination" therapy.)

Criteria for LVADs exclude patients with biventricular failure, and
(because of the relatively large size of the device) patients with a total
body surface area less than 1.5 square meters (~120 lb). Thus, many women
and virtually all children are not candidates for mechanical left
ventricular assistance. As has been the case for Food and Drug
Administration protocols using LVADs, proposed investigations involving
biologic assist devices (xenografts), have sought to evaluate a short-term
alternative to allotransplantation in patients for whom a donor heart is
not immediately available, and death is imminent. Only candidates who meet
criteria for heart transplantation, but do not meet criteria for LVAD
insertion, would be considered for a heart xenobridge. Similar clinical
scenarios have been proposed for other solid organ transplants. Since they
were first introduced by Cooley in 1969, temporary mechanical circulatory
support devices have become critically useful tools in the therapeutic
armamentarium available to patients awaiting transplantation (42).
Nevertheless, at present, the widespread application of mechanical
circulatory support is limited both by patient selection criteria and by
the temporary nature of the device. For excluded patients, as well as many
adult male candidates. For excluded patients, cardiac xenotransplantation
may be the only reasonable alternative to cardiac allograft replacement.

Investigations in clinical xenotransplantation have been accused of using
"the guise of [being a] bridge-to-transplantation" to appear acceptable to
Institutional Research/Ethical Boards (5). However, the use of xenografts
(or mechanical devices) solely as bridges to allotransplantation will not
increase the donor pool, and, therefore, successful permanent
xenotransplantation must itself be seen as the target for future clinical
investigations. The goal of these studies is thus not to engage, as
Hastillo and Hess (5) would suggest, in the "premature use of unproven
procedures in fellow humans," but rather to impact positively on the
current shortage of human donor organs (6). In 1996, the clinical picture
is no less bleak and the conclusions no less valid. The question that
remains is not how but rather when xenotransplantation should advance to
the clinical arena. Most of the uncertainties surrounding its advancement
will only be answered by its undertaking.

In the foreseeable future, clinical xenotransplantation may achieve its
targeted goal of extended graft survival. As was the case during the early
years of allotransplantation, clinical xenotransplantation must persevere
under the consideration of and often in spite of scrutiny by its most
demanding critics, for while "success has a hundred fathers, failure is an
orphan" (43).

Robert E. Michler
Director of Heart Transplant Service
Division of Cardiothoracic Surgery
Columbia-Presbyterian Medical
Center, New York, NY, USA

References

  1. Hardy JD, Chavez CM, Kurrus FE, et al. Heart transplantation in man:
     developmental studies and report of a case. JAMA 1964;188:114-22.
  2. Wilson JD, et al., editors. Harrison's Principles of internal
     medicine, twelfth edition. New York: McGraw-Hill, Inc., 1991:1495.
  3. Allan JS. Xenotransplantation at a crossroads: prevention vs.
     progress. Nature 1996;2:18-21.
  4. Michaels MG, Simmons RL. Xenotransplant-associated zoonoses.
     Transplantation 1994;57:1-7.
  5. Hastillo A, Hess ML. Heart xenografting: a route not yet to trod. J
     Heart Lung Transplant 1993;12:3-4.
  6. Fox RC, Swazey JP. The experimental-therapy dilemma. In: The courage
     to fail. Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 1974:60-83.
  7. Barnard CN. A human cardiac transplant: an interim report of a
     successful operation performed at Groote Schuur Hospital, Capetown. S
     Afr Med J 1968;41:1271-4.
  8. Myerowitz PD. The history of heart transplantation. In: Myerowitz PD,
     editor. Heart transplantation. Mount Kisco, NY: Future Publishing Co,
     1987:1-17.
  9. Kapoor AS, Schroeder JS. Historical perspective of cardiac
     transplantation. In: Kapoor AS, Laks H, Schroeder JS, Jacoub MH,
     editors. Cardiomyopathies and heart-lung transplantation. New York:
     McGraw-Hill, 1991:135-40.
 10. Fox RC, Swazey JP. The heart transplant moratorium. In: The courage to
     fail. Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 1974:122-48.
 11. Lower RR, Dong E, Shumway NE. Long-term survival of cardiac
     homografts. Surgery 1965;58:110-9.
 12. Kaye MP. The registry of the international society for heart and lung
     transplantation: ninth official report—1992. J Heart Lung Transplant
     1992;11:599-606.
 13. Schirire V, Beck W. Human heart transplantation—the pre-operative
     assessment. S Afr Med J 1968;41:1263-5.
 14. Transplantation of the heart:  whither? [editorial] S Afr Med J
     1968;41:1258-9.
 15. Page IH. The ethics of heart transplantation. JAMA 1969;207:109-13.
 16. Bethesda Conference Report. Am J Cardiol 1968;22:899-912.
 17. Thompson JG. Production of severe atheroma in a transplanted human
     heart. Lancet;1969:1088-92.
 18. Cooper DKC. Heart transplantation at the University of Cape Town—an
     overview. In: Cooper DKC, Lanza RP, editors. Heart transplantation:
     the present status of orthotopic and heterotopic heart
     transplantation. Lancaster: MTP Press, 1984:351-61.
 19. Reemtsma K. Xenotransplantation—a brief history of clinical
     experiences: 1900–1965. In: Cooper DKC, Kemp E, Reemtsma K, White D,
     editors. New York: Springer-Verlag, 1991:10-12.
 20. Reemtsma K, McCracken BH, Schlegel JU, et al. Renal
     heterotransplantation in man. Ann Surg 1964;160:384-410.
 21. Hardy JD, Kurrus FE, Chavaz CM, et al. Heart transplantation in man:
     developmental studies and review of a case. JAMA 1964;188:1132.
 22. Cooley DA, Hallman GL, Bloodwell RD, et al. Human heart
     transplantation: experience with 12 cases. Am J Cardiol 1968;22:804.
 23. Ross DN. In: Shapiro H, editor. Experience with human heart
     transplantation. Durban, South Africa: Butterworths, 1969:227-8.
 24. Marion P. Les transplantations cardiques et les transplantation
     hepatiques. Lyon Med 1969;222:585.
 25. Barnard CN, Wipowitz A, Losman JG. Heterotopic cardiac transplantation
     with a xenograft for assistance of the left heart in cardiogenic shock
     after cardiopulmonary bypass. S Afr Med J 1977;52:1035.
 26. Bailey LL, Nehlensen Bannarella SL, Concepcion W, et al. Cardiac
     xenotransplantation in a neonate. JAMA 1985;254:3321-9.
 27. Bailey LL, Jan J, Johnson W, Jolley WB. Orthotopic cardiac
     xenografting in the newborn goat. J Thorac Cardiovasc Surg
     1985;89:242-7.
 28. Losman JG. Heart transplantation in a newborn. J Heart Transplant
     1984;4:10-1.
 29. Starzl TE, Fung JJ, Tzakis A, et al. Baboon-to-human liver
     transplantation. Lancet 1993;341:65-71.
 30. Cooley DA, Hallman GL, Bloodwell RD, Nora JJ, Leachman RD. Human heart
     transplantation: experience with 12 cases. Am J Cardiol
     1968;22:804-10.
 31. Ross DN. In: Experience with human heart transplantation. H. Shapiro,
     editor. Durban, South Africa: Butterworths, 1969:227-8.
 32. Czaplicki J, Blonska B, Religa Z. The lack of hyperacute xenogeneic
     heart transplant rejection in a human. J Heart Transplant
     1992;11:393-6.
 33. Salomon DR. Invited comment. J Heart Transplant 1992;11:396-7.
 34. Michler RE, McManus RP, Sadeghi AN, et al. Prolonged primate cardiac
     xenograft survival with cyclosporine. Surg Forum 1985:359-60.
 35. Michler RE, McManus RP, Smith CR, et al. Prolongation of primate
     cardiac xenograft survival with cyclosporine. Transplantation
     1987;44:632-6.
 36. Celli S, Valdivia LA, Fung JJ, et al. Long-term survival of heart and
     liver xenografts with splenectomy and FK506. Transplant Proc
     1993;25:647-8.
 37. Kawauchi M, Gundry SR, de Begona JA, et al. Prolonged orthotopic
     xenoheart transplantation in infant baboons. J Thorac Cardiovasc Surg
     (in press).
 38. House of delegates statement on heart transplantation. J Am Med Assoc
     1969;207:1704-5.
 39. Reemtsma K. Clinical urgency and media scrutiny. Hastings Cent Rep
     1985;15:10-1.
 40. Caplan AL. Ethical issues raised by research involving xenografts. J
     Am Med Assoc 1985;254:3339-43.
 41. Shimkin. The problem of experimentation on human abeings: the research
     worker's point of view. In: Edsall G. A positive approach to the
     problem of human experimentation. Daedalus 1969;98:463-79.
 42. Cooley DA, Liotta D, Hallman GL, Bloodwell RD, Leachman RD, Milam JD.
     Orthotopic cardiac prosthesis for two-staged cardiac replacement. Am J
     Cardiol. 1969;24:723-730.
 43. Ciano G. "Come sempre, la vittoria trova cento padri, e nessuno vuole
     riconoscere l'insuccesso." (September 9, 1942). In: Diario (The Diano
     Diaries) 1939-1943. Milan: Rizzoli, 1946:594.

Dayton, S.; Pearce, M.L.; Hashimoto, S.; Dixon, W.J.: and Tomiyasu. U. l%9. A controlled
clinical trial of a diet high in unsaturated fat in preventing complications of atherosclerosis.

Phone no: 202-555-0111
Email: Sirstion67@cuvox.de  

     Drug Keywords ["Respiratory disease","Asthma","Cerebrovascular disease","Migraine","Bipolar","Hypertension","Medications","Osteoarthritis","Lipid","Vertigo","Cancer","Injury"]


A317	WOMENS CHRISTIAN ASSOC HOSPITAL SCH OF XRAY TECHN	207 FOOTE AVE		JAMESTOWN	NY	14701
A317	WOMENS CHRISTIAN ASSOC HOSPITAL SCH OF XRAY TECHN	207 FOOTE AVE		JAMESTOWN	NY	14701
A317	WOMENS CHRISTIAN ASSOC HOSPITAL SCH OF XRAY TECHN	207 FOOTE AVE		JAMESTOWN	NY	14701 
