
Swift Code: ALLYUS31
Email: steffanie_donnelly@tincidunt.com
Statement of Tim Felt
President and CEO, Explorer Pipeline
Before the Senate Committee on Commerce, Science and Transportation
On Reauthorization of the Pipeline Safety Program

Mr. Chairman, Members of the Committee, my name is Tim Felt.  I am President and CEO of Explorer Pipeline Company, headquartered in Tulsa, Oklahoma.  Explorer operates 1,400 miles of petroleum products pipeline serving 16 states extending from the Gulf Coast throughout the mid-western United States.
I am a member of the API Pipeline Committee, vice-chairman and treasurer elect of the Association of Oil Pipe Lines, and the oil pipeline industry’s board member for the Common Ground Alliance, a voluntary, private sector organization dedicated to the prevention of excavation damage to underground facilities.  I appreciate the opportunity to appear today on behalf of API and AOPL.  Together, API and AOPL represent the companies responsible for the vast majority of U.S. oil pipeline transportation.  
Summary
As the Committee reviews the current state of pipeline safety and the progress that has been made since the 2002 Act, these are the main points I would like to emphasize:
We need to enact pipeline safety reauthorization legislation before the end of this Congress.  A lot of work has gone into the current bills, and there are no major disagreements about what a compromise among the various bills should look like.  Let’s get a good bill passed now.
The Pipeline Safety Improvement Act of 2002 is a success.  Industry and DOT have cooperated to achieve significant improvement in pipeline safety, and this improvement is demonstrated by our industry’s record.  This record is reflected on the charts that accompany my testimony.
The oil pipeline industry is making the investments needed to fully comply with the law and related regulations and in many cases to exceed their requirements.  We plan to invest over $1 billion in pipeline safety improvements over the next five years.  Because of this, it is very important that Congress reauthorize the DOT pipeline safety program in 2006.  Reauthorization sends a clear signal that these investments are appropriate, and DOT is on the right track in implementing the 2002 Act. 
