


REQUEST FOR HEALTH INSURANCE CREDIT Virginia Sickness and Disability Program (VSDP) LTD Participants
The Benefits Center 
P.O. Box 100158 
Columbia,  SC 29202-3158 
Phone 800-652-5602 Fax 800-447-2498

1. Social Security Number
086-66-1983
2. Daytime Phone Number
(757)969-7697
3. Reason for Request 
ロ New LTD participant
X Change in health insurance premium or policy

Complete this form to request a health insurance credit or to notify Unum of changes to insurance coverage and/or premium amount.
PART A. LTD PARTICIPANT INFORMATION (Please print)
4. Name (Fįrst) (MI) (Laşt) (Jr./Sr.)
           Paige M.  Kitchen
5. Address 			(street)		(City)		(State) (Zip+4)
                        4349 Marcus Street            Huntsville,         AL    35816
6. Are you covered by Part B of Medicare?
ロ  Yes ロ  No  if yes:  a) Enter the effective date of Medicare: _________________ (mm/ddlyyyy)
			b) Enter the current premium amount: $____________________ /month
If you do not have insurance other than Medicare, continue to Part D of this form. To report other insurance policies, continue to Part B.

PART B. INSURANCE POLICY INFORMATION if you have health, dental, vision, or prescription drug insurance, complete boxes 7-9 about that policy.
7. If the policy is a Commonwealth of Virginia (COVA) Health Benefit Plan, enter the plan name:
ANTHEM BlueCross + Blue Shield
(COBRA)
If not, enter the following information from the current health insurance card:
Plan Name: 										Membership Type (Choose one): 
Address:										ロ  Single ロ  Two People  ロ  Family
											Policy Number.
8. Premium information
a) How many times per year is the insurance premium paid? Monthly
b) How much is each premium payment? 604.00
c) How much of each payment pays the LTD participant's portion of the coverage? 10090
d) What is the effective date of this premium amounts? July 1, 2014
9. Cancellation Date of Previous Policy (f applicable) (mm/dd/yyyy) June 30, 2014

CU-4752 (05/10)


10. SSN
086-66-1983
PART C. INSURANCE POLICY INFORMATION – ADDITIONAL POLICY
If you have health, dental, vision, or prescription drug insurance other than the policies listed in Part A or Part B of this form, complete boxes 11-13 about that policy.
11. Enter policy information from the current health insurance card for policies other than those listed in Part A or B:
Plan Name: Membership Type (Choose one):
Address: []. Single C Two People C Family
Policy Number.
12. Premium Information
a) How many times per year is the insurance premium paid? b) How much is each premium payment? $ c) How much of each payment pays the LTD participant's portion of the coverage? $ d) What is the effective date of this premium amount?
13. Cancellation Date of Previous Policy (f applicable) (mm/dd/yyyy)
PART D. LTD MEMBER CERTIFICATION
I understand that I am responsible for repaying any overpayment of the Virginia Retirement System (VRS) health insurance credit. Unum may invoice me for the overpayment or recoup the amount from my VSDP long-term disability benefit. In addition, I understand, upon my death or claim for accelerated life insurance benefits, that any remaining balance will be recovered from the proceeds of my group life insurance coverage. VRS may recover the overpayment from any refund of retirement contributions and interest payable upon my death. VRS may also recover the overpayment from my service retirement benefit. I certify the information I have provided on this document is true, and understand that any willful falsification of facts presented may result in prosecution for a Class I misdemeanor as provided by law. I also understand that I must immediately report any change in health insurance coverage to Unum.

LTD Participa Signature
Date
CU-4752 (05/10)


INSTRUCTIONS FOR COMPLETING THE REQUEST FOR HEALTH INSURANCE CREDIT
You may need to complete additional forms if you are making changes for policies with different effective dates.
Part A. LTD Participant Information
Boxes 1–5: Enter your personal information.
Box 6: If you are covered by Medicare, choose Yes and include the effective date of your Medicare Part B
coverage and the premium amount you pay each month.
Parts B and C. Insurance Policy Information
If you have health, dental, vision, or prescription drug insurance, complete Part B. If you have more than one policy, provide the additional policy information in Part C.
Note: Policies not eligible for reimbursement include long-term disability, home health care, long-term care, dread disease (such as cancer), hospital indemnity or policies that restrict payment of benefits that treat specific illnesses.
To complete Part B (and Part C), enter the following information from your policy. (Do not include information from policies that are no longer in effect or that are not eligible for reimbursement.)
Box 7: If your policy is an employer-sponsored Commonwealth of Virginia (COVA) Health Benefit Plan
administered by the Department of Human Resource Management, enter the plan name. (Example: Advantage 65)
If your policy is not a COVA policy, use your current insurance card to enter the name and address of the provider, the membership type you selected, and the policy number.
Box 8: Answer the four questions about the premium that is paid for the insurance policy in Box 7.
Indicate the number of times each year you pay the premium, the total amount of each payment, how much of that amount is for your portion of the policy, and the date when this premium amount became effective.
Box 9: Enter the cancellation date for the previous policy used to determine your health insurance credit if
it applies.
(If you have a secondary medical insurance policy, complete Part C in the same manner as Part B.)
Part D. LTD Participant Certification
Sign and date in Part D after reading the certification statement. Send the completed form to Unum at the address on the top of the form. You may be retroactively reimbursed for up to a maximum of 12 months from the date the completed form is received by Unum as long as the necessary health insurance information is provided. Unum is required by law to send all plan participants an annual reminder to keep their health insurance coverage information current.
Unum is a registered trademark and marketingbrand of Unum Group and its insuring subsidiaries.
CU-4752 (05/10)

Social Security No: 576-55-4600
age 32 years old
name= Alex Curry
Email: lex@gmail.com
Address: 580 Hawthorne Avenue Piedmont, South Carolina 29673
date of birth 08/27/1991
