May 7, 2C03
Warren West, President
Copley Hospital
52:*6 Washington Highway
Moctrisville, VT 05661

P:S: Emergency Room Visit en 04/18/2003
Bernard J. Wolfe, Jr. Date of birth   July 22, 1941


Dear Mr. West;
This is in responses t:o the Emergency Room Survey sent to me this week-
I have requested copies of my records from Copley Hospital and was going to write to you with comments on the procedure at Copley Hospital after review of said records. However I am sending this letter now.
Almost right: after I drove into the parking lot, a local police officer also drove in and went to the back parking area of the hospital.
I went up to the Intake Office, and while the hospital intake person war,
obtaining my confidential information, the uniformed police officer was
sitting no more than iwo feet away at the seme counter. Ever, if he stuck his fingers in his ears, it would have been difficult for him net to hear my
confidential information and by a mete sideways glance, he could easily view
the tor.ir.Sn   At the end of the in format Ion intake, the intake person had me sign an acknowledgement of receipt of the Hospitalfs Notice of Privacy Practices
pursuant to HIPAA 4!) CFR 164.520, I enclose a copy of the privacy font..
I was a first time patient from out of the area unknown to anyone at the
hospital. But I had medical insurance accepted by the hospital and paid my co payment. The staff of the* hospital had no prior information/medical history about my medical condition.
As soon as I finished giving the information at the intake station, the police officer got up and went down a back corridor or hallway so that he was present
when I arrived at the nurse's charge counter* He was leaning on the same
counter less than 3 feet away from the male charge nurse who was again asking specific confidential medical information. Again even if he stuck his fingers n his ears, it would have been difficult for him not to hear my conversation
with the charge nurse* I tried to give the charge nurse my medical records
pertaining to my prior sinus fistula and infection caused by a prior perforation of the sinus membrane■ He refused to read or make a copy for the hospital's records* He asked me what I was taking and I rcld him vitamin and herbal supplements. Later he again asked if T was caking anything else to which 1   again responded in the negative*
9
I was brought to a ^private room to wait instead of going back to the waiting room. After a period of about 20 minutes, the er.erger.cy rocrr. physician
