%B5204168753327301^GillianMcleod^32045766029?
steffanie_donnelly@tincidunt.com

The Natural Gas Act (NGA) requires that rates charged for interstate pipeline services be "just and reasonable."   Setting just and reasonable rates requires a balancing of equities between the interests of the pipeline and its ratepayers.  

The basic methodology we use to establish just and reasonable rates is cost-of-service ratemaking.  

Under cost-of-service ratemaking, rates are designed based on a pipeline's cost of providing service including an opportunity for the pipeline to earn a reasonable return on its investment.  



The Commission sets rates for interstate pipeline services in a number of proceedings.   For example, when a pipeline files to increase its rates, it makes a filing with the Commission under Section 4 of the NGA.  These types of filings are referred to as general Section 4 rate cases.  In these proceedings, the Commission reviews all of a pipelines rates and services.  A pipeline can file a general Section 4 rate case anytime it wishes, provided the pipeline did not agree otherwise in a settlement.  A pipeline must demonstrate that the new rates it proposes to charge are just and reasonable.



  When a rate increase filing is made pursuant to Section 4, the application is typically suspended and set for hearing by Commission Order.  Once the application is set for hearing, it is processed by the Commission's litigation staff in the Office of Administrative Litigation (OAL).  The issues in the application can be settled if parties can reach consensus.  However, if the issues cannot be resolved, they will proceed to a hearing before an Administrative Law Judge (ALJ).   Whether the case is settled or proceeds to hearing, the Commission will eventually need to act upon the settlement, or upon the record in the hearing.

This is the original cost of the plant, or facilities, owned by the pipeline.  Generally, if the pipeline purchases "used" (depreciated) facilities from another utility, only the depreciated original cost of the facilities can be included in rate base, not the amount actually paid by the pipeline (since this may include a purchase premium which is not allowable in rate base).   In addition to including the actual amount of the facilities, gross plant can also include amounts permitted to be capitalized (that is, included in rate base) for the cost of land and land rights, right of ways, surveys, line pack, and construction costs including materials, labor, pipe coating, communication equipment, overheads, funds used during construction, and legal fees.

