SSN: 576-55-4600
Name: Layla Abbott
Address: 580 Hawthorne Avenue Piedmont, South Carolina 29673

In Appendix I, we summarize the properties of diamond and, for comparison, those of silicon.  The most distinctive feature of diamond is its large band gap, 5.5 eV. This large band gap along with the associated large cohesive energy are responsible for much of the radiation hardness of diamond.  The large band gap also makes diamond an excellent electrical insulator. As a result, a large electric field can be applied without producing significant leakage current. Thus, there is no need for a reverse biased pn-junction and the diamond detector functions much like a ``solid-state'' ionization chamber. Diamond has two additional properties that are favorable compared to silicon. Its smaller dielectric constant yields a smaller detector capacitance and, thereby, better noise performance of the associated front-end electronics.  In addition, even though diamond is an electrical insulator, it is an excellent thermal conductor with a thermal conductivity exceeding that of copper by a factor of five.  A common problem with large strip detector systems is the management of the thermal load generated by the large number of electronic channels used in the detector readout. The handling of this thermal load would be simplified if the detectors were constructed from diamond.

Diamond appears ideal in many respects but it does have a limitation: the large band gap which produces many of its outstanding properties limits the signal size to at most half that of silicon for a given detector thickness in radiation lengths.  This may be partially compensated by lower front-end electronic noise due to diamond's nearly non-existent leakage current and, for strip detectors, diamond's lower capacitive load.

In the figure below, we show the basic principle behind the use of diamond as a charged particle detector.  Several hundred volts (~1V/μm) is applied across a layer of diamond a few hundred microns thick.
PERSONNEL AND INSTITUTIONSreement.
6.8	If the experiment brings to Fermilab on-line data acquisition or data communications equipment to be integrated with Fermilab owned equipment, early consultation with the Computing Division is advised.
6.9	At the completion of the experiment:
6.9.1	The Diamond Detector Research Group Spokesperson is responsible for the return of all PREP equipment, Computing equipment and non-PREP data acquisition electronics. If the return is not completed after a period of one year after the end of running the Diamond Detector Research Group Spokesperson will be required to furnish, in writing, an explanation for any non-return.
6.9.2	The experimenters agree to remove their experimental equipment as the Laboratory requests them to. They agree to remove it expeditiously and in compliance with all ES&H requirements, including those related to transportation. All the expenses and personnel for the removal will be borne by the experimenters.
